---
layout: post
title:  "OOP Java P1 Wk2"
date:   2017-05-17 10:07:30
categories: java
tags: [MOOC]
years: ['2017']
comments: true
---

# OOP Java Part 1 Week 2

The Week 2 covers loops and basics of methods. Earlier in my other previous posts, I mentioned that we could use either [Netbeans][Netbeans], or [Eclipse][Eclipse]. I realized that in [MOOC][MOOC], it's <strong>required</strong> to use <strong>NetBeans</strong> in order to <strong>unlock new exercises</strong> such as week 2 and other weeks exercises.

I copied and pasted all exercises from Eclipse to NetBeans. Some of my codes are not accepted, most of them are rejected because of simple `String`, and or `whitespaces` differences. I have to follow specifics, like typing the exact same `String` as they want me to, for example: same number of whitespaces in the `String`. I do enjoy using Eclipse, because sometime I have to do more programming where components of methods aren't included and I make them myself. Netbeans have components and methods for us to use quickly . That kind of takes the fun away. Just because Netbeans have components ready, doesn't mean it's easier. <strong>It is a lot harder</strong>, because it wants us to program in a certain way. <strong>So have a ton of patience!</strong>

# Week 2 begins!

This week covers basic mathematic programming. I am going to summarize and cover highlights where I wouldn't have to repeat similar exercises. Some exercises will be similar and yet different.

## EXERCISE #33

This exercise teaches how to do sum of all numbers between two inputted numbers. It is a simple programming.

```java
public class TheSumBetweenTwoNumbers {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scanner reader = new Scanner(System.in);
        System.out.print("First: ");
        int num1 = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());

        System.out.print("Last: ");
        int num2 = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());

        int sum = 0;

        while (num1 <= num2) {
            sum += num1;
            num1++;

            System.out.println(num1);
        }

        System.out.println("The sum is " + (sum));  
    }
}
```

`Scanner` does what it does... parsing input. `Integer.parseInt()` parses integer. First input is given a number `num1`, and then second input a second number `num2`. I want to add up all the numbers between `num1` and `num2`, so I create a variable `sum` and set it to equal to `0`.

The next step is setting up a `while()` loop. Its <strong>condition is true</strong> as long `num1` is less or equals to `num2`.  Starting with `sum` and add up to the `num1`. <strong>Notice how `sum` completely ignores `num2`.</strong> Next step is `num1` increments by one every time a loop rolled. Finally, incremented `num1` is printed.

The loop rolls on... until `num1` equals to `num2`. `num1` <strong>isn't the sum of anything another than an increment by 1.</strong> However `sum` is adding up in every loop. Once the loop ended, `sum` is printed and is the desired result.   

## EXERCISE #34

<strong>Exercise #34</strong> is the same idea as <strong>Exercise #33</strong>. It wants the result of factorial on a number. Factorial number symbol looks like this <strong>n!</strong>, and we cannot use do `n!`. The `!` is somewhat an operator and cannot be used as in variable unless it is a string. I always could use `n` as a short for `number`. Take a look at this code below:

```java
public class Factorial {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Scanner reader = new Scanner(System.in);

        System.out.print("Type a number: ");
        int n = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());

        int count = 1;
        int product = 1;

        while (count <= n) {
                product *= count;
                count++;
        } System.out.println("Factorial is " + product);
    }
}
```

I am going to use `product` instead of `sum`. Isn't that what <strong>product</strong> means after of all? Using `while()` again, with a <strong>condition being true</strong> as long `count` is less or equals to `n`. Setting `count` and `product` as 1. It's what makes this little different from add and subtract. If I multiply any number to `0`, it will always remains `0`. I don't want that. `product` ignores `n`, and multiplies `count` while becoming the new `product`. Same process as in <strong>Exercise #33</strong>, `count` increments by 1 until it equals to the given number `n`.  Finally when the loop ends, `product` is printed as a result outside the loop.

## EXERCISE #35

Almost same formula as two other exercises above. Just more tasks and more results expected. The tasks listed:

- program the power of n
- find the result
- sum up each results

I got to use this method `Math.pow(number, power)` and it returns `double` type where will have a decimal result. One thing great about [MOOC][MOOC], is that it taught me this new trick. Showing it to you below!  

```java
System.out.print("Type a number: ");
    int power = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());
    int sum = 0;
    while(power >= 0) {
        int result = (int)Math.pow(2, power);
        System.out.println(result);
        sum += result;
        power--;
    }


    System.out.println("The result is " + sum);
}
```

Using `(int)Math.pow(number, power)` will automatically convert the `double` result into an `int`. What's happening here is I created two variables `power` and `sum`. `power` will receive an input from a user. `sum` is set as `0`. Using same `while()` loop as previous two exercises. The <strong>condition</strong> is slightly different, it's the opposite. It's <strong>true</strong> as long the `power` is greater than `0`. While it's true, the first step inside the loop is producing a `result` and then have it printed to get a better idea of what's going on during the loops. `sum` adds up `result`. The `power` is <strong>decremented</strong> by 1 until the loop ends. `sum` is then printed as a final.

## EXERCISE #36

I am going to close this post with <strong>Exercise #36</strong>. Will continue with week 2 on the next post. This <strong>Exercise #36</strong> is fun and expects much more results. What this exercise wants...

- to be able to put in many inputs as user want
- end the `while()` loop with a trigger using `-1` or any negative number
- send out a farewell string
- print the sum of all inputs except for a negative number
- count how many times the inputs were entered
- find the average out of all inputs
- find how many odd numbers were entered
- find how many even numbers were entered

Woo! I held my breath as long as I could, to list all these! Let's do the first half then second half afterward. For a user to enter inputs <strong>as many as</strong> he/she wants, we will need to use a `while()` loop. It wants us to <strong>end the loop</strong> by entering a <strong>negative number</strong>. Easily done with `break;`! Send out a `String`? Not a problem! `sum`... hmm we have done all that in the previous exercises in this post.

<strong>First half: </strong>

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {

    Scanner reader = new Scanner(System.in);

    System.out.print("Type numbers: ");
    int sum = 0;
    int num;

    while (true) {
        num = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());
        if (num < 0) {
            System.out.println("Thank you and see you later!");
            num = 0;
            break;
        } else {
            sum += num;
        }
     }
    System.out.println("The sum is " + sum);
}
```

This is the first half, and let's concise on what's happening in that code.

- Two variables are entered
  - `sum` equals to `0`, "intialized" to add up all inputs
  - `num` is the input that user enters

- `while()` loop with a condition saying <strong>always true</strong>
  - `num` inputs parser is put in there so user can put as many as inputs he/she want

- `if` conditional statment when `num` is less than `0`
  - `String` printed
  - negative number `num` is set to `0` so it wouldn't affect the sum
  - `break;` is triggered, ending the always true

- `else` conditional statment when when inputs are not and have not been negative
  - inputs are being added up to `sum`

- `sum` is printed when the loop ended


I hope that's clear, and now <strong>second half</strong> coming up!

```java
public static void main(String[] args) {
   Scanner reader = new Scanner(System.in);

    System.out.print("Type numbers: ");
    int i = 0;
    int sum = 0;
    int num;
    double average = 0;
    int oddNum = 0;
    int evenNum = 0;

    while (true) {
        num = Integer.parseInt(reader.nextLine());
        if (num < 0) {
            System.out.println("Thank you and see you later!");
            num = 0;
            break;
        } else {
            i++;
            sum += num;
            if (num % 2 != 0) {
                    oddNum++;
            } else {
                    evenNum++;
            }
        }
     }

    average = ((1.0*sum)/i);

    System.out.println("The sum is " + sum);
    System.out.println("How many numbers entered: " + i);
    System.out.println("Average: " + sum + " / " + i + " = " + average);
    System.out.println("Odd numbers: " + oddNum);
    System.out.println("Even numbers: " + evenNum);
}
```
Few variables are added. `i` to count how many times inputs are entered. Variable `double average` is added to calculate the average, using `double` to get the result in decimal. Two other variables count inputs that are either even numbers or odd numbers. All are "initialized" by setting to `0`

Add the process inside `else` conditional statment, because it's where loop continues rolling. `i++` to increment by 1 to count the inputs. Add another branches of conditional statments inside the `else`, saying `if` input is not a even number, `oddNum++` increments. Else `evenNum++` increments.

Outside the loop when it's done `break;`, `average` set to a mathematic equation saying `((1.0 * sum) / i)`. Now I think this is <strong>important</strong> to point out, just because <strong>`average` is assigned to a `double` type doesn't mean it will give a correct answer.</strong> It will just result with a decimal. So I added `1.0`, and then `average` will have the exact quotient.

Concluding... print all the results!

[MOOC]: https://www.mooc.fi/
[NetBeans]: https://www.netbeans.org
[Eclipse]: http://www.eclipse.org/downloads/packages/
